how our laws are madI introductioThis brochure is intended to provide a basic outline of the nu- merous steps of our federal lawmaking process from the source oan idea for a legislative proposal through its publication as a stat- ute . The legislative process is a matter about which every persoshould be well informed in order to understand and appreciate thwork of Congress It is hoped that this guide will enable readers to gain a greateunderstanding of the federal legislative process and its role as onof the foundations of our representative system . One of the mospractical safeguards of the American democratic way of life is thilegislative process with its emphasis on the protection of the minor- ity , allowing ample opportunity to all sides to be heard and maktheir views known . The fact that a proposal cannot become a lawithout consideration and approval by both Houses of Congress ian outstanding virtue of our bicameral legislative system . The opeand full discussion provided under the Constitution often results ithe notable improvement of a bill by amendment before it becomelaw or in the eventual defeat of an inadvisable proposaAs the majority of laws originate in the House of Representativetives , this discussion will focus principally on the procedure in thabody II. The CongresArticle I , Section 1 , of the United States Constitution , providethat All legislative Powers herein granted shall be vested in a Congress of the UniteStates , which shall consist of a Senate and House of RepresentativeThe Senate is composed of 100 Members-two from each statregardless of population or area-elected by the people in accord- ance with the 17th Amendment to the Constitution . The 17tAmendment changed the former constitutional method undewhich Senators were chosen by the respective state legislatures . Senator must be at least 30 years of age , have been a citizen of thUnited States for nine years , and , when elected , he an inhabitanof the state for which the Senator is chosen . The term of office isix years and one-third of the total membership of the Senate i <h1> ( </h1> <h1> 2 </h1>elected every second year . The terms of both Senators from a par- ticular state are arranged so that they do not terminate at thsame time . Of the two Senators from a state serving at the samtime the one who was elected first-or if both were elected at thsame time , the one elected for a full term-is referred to as th" senior " Senator from that state . The other is referred to as th" junior " Senator . If a Senator dies or resigns during the term , thgovernor of the state must call a special election unless the statlegislature has authorized the governor to appoint a successor untithe next election , at which time a successor is elected for the bal- ance of the term . Most of the state legislatures have granted theigovernors the power of appointment Each Senator has one vote As constituted in the 110th Congress , the House of Representativetives is composed of 435 Members elected every two years froamong the 50 states , apportioned to their total populations . Thpermanent number of 435 was established by federal law followinthe Thirteenth Decennial Census in 1910 , in accordance with Arti- de I. Section 2 , of the Constitution . This number was increasetemporarily to 437 for the 87th Congress to provide for one Rep- resentative each for Alaska and Hawaii . The Constitution limitthe number of Representatives to not more than one for ever30,000 of population . Under a former apportionment in one stata particular Representative represented more than 900,000 con- stituents , while another in the same state was elected from a dis- trict having a population of only 175,000 . The Supreme Court hasince held unconstitutional a Missouri statute permitting a max- imum population variance of 3.1 percent from mathematical equal- ity . The Court ruled in Kirkpatrick v. Preisler , 394 U.S. 526 ( 1969 ) that the variances among the districts were not unavoidable and therefore , were invalid . That decision was an interpretation of thCourt's earlier ruling in Wesberry v. Sanders , 376 U.S. 1 ( 1964 ) that the Constitution requires that " as nearly as is practicable onman's vote in a congressional election is to be worth as much aanother's . A law enacted in 1967 abolished all " at-large " elections except ithose less populous states entitled to only one Representative . A" at-large " election is one in which a Representative is elected bthe voters of the entire state rather than by the voters in a con- gressional district within the state A Representative must be at least 25 years of age , have been citizen of the United States for seven years , and , when elected , ban inhabitant of the state in which the Representative is choseUnlike the Senate where a successor may be appointed by a gov- error when a vacancy occurs during a term , if a Representative